HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President-elect
Donald Trump denies reports of a
disorderly
transition as he begins shaping
his new administration.
Also ahead this Wednesday: As
protests against
the Dakota Access pipeline grow
nationwide,
we talk with the CEO of the
company trying
to move the oil.
KELCY WARREN, CEO, Energy
Transfer Partners:
We're complying with all the
laws, all the
rules, and we're overdesigning.
This pipeline is being built to
safety standards
that far exceed what the
government requires
us to do.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And we head to
the front
lines in the battle against
ISIS, where Iraqi
forces try to take back the key
city of Mosul.
JANE FERGUSON: This is as far as
the front
line comes here in Mosul in this
neighborhood,
just this pile of rubble, beyond
it, ISIS
fighters.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: From the top
of Trump Tower
in New York on down, the message
today was
emphatic: There is no turmoil in
the transition.
News accounts told of more
moderate figures
being purged, of advisers
fighting for power,
and of foreign officials unable
to reach Trump
aides.
The president-elect denied it
all in a series
of tweets.
Instead, he wrote, it is going
so smoothly,
and his spokesman echoed the
claim.
JASON MILLER, Trump Campaign
Senior Communications
Adviser: Inside, there's a very
solid plan.
There's a methodical approach to
all this
being put together.
I have read a number of the news
reports that
want to make us kind of like --
there's all
sorts of descriptions I have
heard.
It's very calm, it's very
structured.
And anyone saying anything else
is either,
A, bitter because they're not on
the inside
and not being considered, or
they're someone
who is just bitter because the
election was
last week and they didn't get
the result that
they wanted.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile, in
Washington,
vice president-elect Pence met
with Vice President
Biden, who said he's confident
everything
will be in good hands on day one
of the new
administration.
But House Democrats formally
asked that Steve
Bannon not be made a senior
adviser.
They cited allegations of racial
bigotry and
anti-Semitism, which Bannon
denies.
President Obama also offered
reassurance about
the political transition on his
farewell tour
of Europe.
Mr. Obama visited the ancient
Acropolis in
Athens, Greece, the cradle of
democracy.
And in a speech, he again
promised a peaceful
handover of power.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
As you may have noticed, the
next American
president and I could not be
more different.
(LAUGHTER)
(APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: We have very
different points
of view, but American democracy
is bigger
than any one person.
HARI SREENIVASAN: From Greece,
the president
flew on to Germany.
The president of Turkey today
criticized anti-Trump
protesters in the U.S. Recep
Tayyip Erdogan
said his message is show some
respect and
wait to see how he actually
governs.
And in a TV interview, Syrian
President Bashar
al-Assad praised Mr. Trump's
campaign comments
on fighting Islamic State forces
in Syria.
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, President of
Syria (through
translator): If -- I say if --
if he is going
to fight the terrorists, of
course, we're
going to be ally, natural ally
in that regard,
with the Russians, with
Iranians, with many
other countries.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
president-elect has
said he would prioritize
fighting ISIS over
regime change in Syria.
In Russia, the Supreme Court has
overturned
a criminal conviction against
opposition leader
Alexei Navalny.
He was convicted for
embezzlement in 2013,
but, in February, the European
Court of Human
Rights ruled his right to a fair
trial had
been violated.
Navalny will now get a new
trial, but that
could still hinder him from
running for office
again.
Back in this country, a
Minnesota policeman
was charged today with
second-degree manslaughter
in the killing of Philando
Castile during
a traffic stop last summer.
Officer Jeronimo Yanez has said
he opened
fire after Castile said he was
armed and appeared
to be reaching for something.
The aftermath was streamed live
by his girlfriend
and triggered protests.
A prosecutor said today the
shooting was totally
unjustified.
JOHN CHOI, Ramsey County
Prosecutor: To those
who may say that this incident
was Philando
Castile's fault, I would submit
that no reasonable
officer, knowing, seeing and
hearing what
Officer Yanez did at the time,
would've used
deadly force under these
circumstances.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yanez could be
sentenced
to up to 10 years in prison if
he's convicted.
Republicans and Democrats in the
Senate picked
their leaders today.
Kentucky Republican Mitch
McConnell was reelected
to serve as majority leader.
New York Democrat Chuck Schumer
will take
over as minority leader,
replacing the retiring
Harry Reid.
Both men talked of looking past
the election
and cooperating where they can.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: we're
going to address the real
concerns of the
American people, not go back and
relitigate
what anybody on either side may
have said
during a very hotly contested
presidential
race.
SEN.
CHARLES SCHUMER (D), New York:
Where we can
work together, we will.
But I have also said to the
president-elect,
on issues where we disagree, you
can expect
a strong and tough fight.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Democrats'
new leadership
team also includes former
presidential candidate
Bernie Sanders.
It's been another long day for
crews trying
to douse flames in seven states
across the
South.
Wildfires have burned roughly
128,000 acres
in woodland areas, much of that
in North Carolina,
and fueled by drought
conditions.
More than 5,000 firefighters are
on the job.
Officials say heavy smoke from
the fires is
causing breathing problems in a
number of
communities.
On Wall Street, bank shares gave
up some post-election
gains, and stocks finished
mostly lower.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly
55 points to close at 18868.
The Nasdaq rose almost 19
points, but the
S&P 500 slid three.
And President Obama has named 21
recipients
of the Presidential Medal of
Freedom, the
nation's highest civilian honor.
The list includes
singer-songwriter Bruce
Springsteen, actor Tom Hanks,
basketball great
Michael Jordan, and
mathematician and computer
scientist Margaret Hamilton,
among others.
They will be recognized in a
White House ceremony
on Tuesday.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
potential
conflicts of interest between
the president-elect
and his business ventures; the
CEO of the
controversial Dakota Access
pipeline on the
project's opposition; the long,
hard fight
for the Iraqi city of Mosul; and
much more.
project's opposition; the long,
hard fight
for the Iraqi city of Mosul; and
much more.
Often, the people a president
surrounds himself
with says something about his
goals as any
policy statement.
President-elect Trump is in the
process of
deciding who will fill critical
national security
and diplomatic posts.
These decisions will shape the
direction of
his presidency and the country.
For more on who's in the running
for these
jobs, and the reaction from
allies and others
overseas, I'm joined now by
"NewsHour" chief
foreign affairs correspondent
Margaret Warner.
There are a lot of important
national security
jobs, foreign policy positions.
What's the latest?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, the
latest is, Hari,
that to experienced foreign
policy hands,
the process looks chaotic.
You have names being raised --
for instance,
let's take secretary of state.
You have John Bolton, the former
U.N. ambassador,
very kind of aggressive, you
would call a
neoconservative.
Then you have Senator Bob
Corker, who is considered
sort of middle of the road and
conservative.
And then you have Rudy Giuliani,
of course,
the former New York mayor.
A few other names have surfaced,
Kelly Ayotte,
Nikki Haley, the South Carolina
governor.
But what troubles those who are
really observing
this process is there seems to
be no rhyme
or reason.
And what you have got are people
who don't
share the same views.
Some don't share the views that
Trump enunciated
during the campaign.
Now, the people close to the
Trump Organization
say, look, we honestly didn't
expect to win.
So they didn't have a big
structure set up,
as Hillary Clinton did, with
somebody like
a former national security
adviser in charge
of this particular part of the
transition.
But I think it is also keeping
with the way
he ran his campaign, which was
kind of freeform
and competing centers of power.
And so then, of course, it's
also, finally,
the first time he's really
having a baptism
by fire in managing this chaotic
-- or, I
would say, diverse Republican
coalition.
So, you have John McCain
lecturing him yesterday
about don't get too close to
Putin.
You have Senator Rand Paul
shooting bullets
at both Bolton and Giuliani,
saying we don't
need a hothead in these jobs.
So I think that everybody will
settle down
once you have got these top jobs
filled.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
President Obama
overseas trying to reassure the
E.U., different
countries, that President Trump
will honor
his commitment to NATO.
How do the Europeans see this?
MARGARET WARNER: One ambassador
said to me,
very reassuring words, but we
want to hear
them from president-elect Trump.
As you said, President Obama
will be meeting
with Chancellor Merkel tomorrow.
They have private meetings
before he goes
in meetings with other NATO
allies.
What concerns the Europeans
deeply are two
things that Donald Trump said
during the campaign.
One was, he questioned the whole
relevance
of the NATO alliance and in fact
some of our
alliances overseas, the burden
that the United
States pays to support them.
And he actually suggested that
maybe NATO
wouldn't come to the rescue some
of country
if it hadn't been -- under
Article V if it
hadn't been paying its full fair
share, which
is supposed to be 2 percent of
GDP.
And so Wolfgang Ischinger, who
used to be
the German ambassador here --
and I spoke
to Ambassador Ischinger late
last night -- and
he said, these are really
dangerous times
for Europe.
We have got the migrant crisis.
We have got Britain leaving the
E.U.
We have got the rise of all
these populist
nationalist parties with some
ugly aspects
to them.
And if we start to feel that the
United States
is not really our reliable
partner, ally,
and anchor, it's going to get
worse, then
dangerous.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, finally,
what about
the relationship between
president-elect Trump
and Putin?
How are Europeans concerned
about this?
MARGARET WARNER: That's a big
part of it,
Hari.
There was actually an
interesting little conference
call yesterday with two former
secretaries
general of NATO.
And I'm surprised they spoke so
bluntly.
There is concern that -- it
didn't go unnoticed
that president-elect Trump
called Vladimir
Putin before he called some NATO
leaders,
and they are concerned that he
will be open
to cutting some separate deal
with Putin,
some sort of trade-off between
Syria and the
Ukraine, without getting into
all the details.
And they said that would really
be very, very
dangerous.
It would send the message that
taking -- you
know, crossing borders and
taking territory
by force is OK.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Margaret
Warner, thanks
so much.
MARGARET WARNER: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Donald Trump
will be sworn
into office on January 20 with
more business
holdings than any previous
president.
John Yang has more on the
questions that are
being asked.
JOHN YANG: The Trump
Organization has a variety
of assets and arrangements that
span the globe.
And, as president, Mr. Trump
will have the
authority to appoint people who
will make
decisions that affect those
businesses.
Here to discuss the potential
for conflict
is Robert Weissman, president of
nonprofit
public interest group Public
Citizen, and
in New York, Susanne Craig, a
New York Times
reporter who has writing about
this story.
Welcome to you both.
Susanne, let me start with you.
This is a very complicated
story.
There are a lot of parts to
president-elect
Trump's business holdings.
But I think the easiest example
is the Trump
International Hotel here in
Washington, D.C.
Walk us through the potential
for conflicts
with that hotel.
SUSANNE CRAIG, The New York
Times: It's really
interesting.
This is a hotel that just
opened, and it's
been -- it's been in progress
for a few years,
and it's on the site of the old
post office,
which is a government property.
And Donald Trump has a ground
lease for 60
years, the Trump Organization,
for 60 years,
to run the hotel out of that.
So there's an arrangement
between the federal
government, an agency called the
GSA, and
the Trump Organization.
And the president has the power
to appoint
the head of the GSA.
So it's just this incredible
situation where
you have got a private company
that will now
be -- that is owned by soon to
be the president
that will be negotiating with a
government
agency where the head of that
agency is appointed
by the president.
So just the potential there for
conflict,
you can just see it coming 100
miles away.
And the GSA is already saying
they are preparing
for it and they're looking at
it.
Imagine that situation and
multiply it by
so many when you look at all the
different
things that could happen with
the various
companies that Donald Trump owns
and the business
interests that he has.
JOHN YANG: And, also, Susanne,
in that hotel
are workers who might want to
unionize.
SUSANNE CRAIG: Who might want to
And this situation's actually
been playing
out in Las Vegas, where he
co-owns a hotel
in Las Vegas, and that hotel has
-- the workers
there have tried to unionize,
and the National
Labor Relations Board, which has
got presidential
appointees on it, has actually
-- the board
has ruled against Donald Trump
even in the
days before the election, so yet
another example
playing out in real time already
where you
have got conflict between the
private -- the
private holdings and now
government agencies
that will have presidential
appointees on
them.
JOHN YANG: Robert Weissman, Hope
Hicks, who
is the spokesperson for
president-elect Trump,
says that Mr. Trump will comply
with all applicable
rules and regulations.
What are the rules and
regulations in this
case?
®MD-BO /ROBERT WEISSMAN,
President, Public
Citizen: Almost none.
SUSANNE CRAIG: Yes.
ROBERT WEISSMAN: There are a lot
of rules,
ethics rules that apply to
government employees,
to members of Congress.
As regards this set of issues,
there's really
not too much that applies to the
president,
except some issues about taking
gifts from
foreign governments.
JOHN YANG: And so there's no
law, there's
nothing that says he has to do
anything with
his personal assets?
ROBERT WEISSMAN: There's no law.
There is common sense.
What we're looking at is an
unprecedented
set of conflicts of interests,
and common
sense says the president has to
divest himself
of these business holdings to
avoid these
conflicts, which will be legion,
covering
everything from worker health
and safety issues,
worker rights that you were
discussing, treatment
of government contractors, to
consumer protection,
how the civil justice system
works, bankruptcy
law, tax policy, even the --
even the conduct
of foreign policy.
It's a staggering set of
potential conflicts
of -- actually, conflicts that
will emerge,
unless he divests.
JOHN YANG: He says he's going to
have his
children running the business.
And Rudy Giuliani says: "You
have to have
some confidence in the integrity
of the president.
I don't think there's any real
fear or suspicion
that he's seeking to enrich
himself by being
president."
How do you respond?
ROBERT WEISSMAN: Well, even if
the president-elect
operates in good faith as
president, the conflicts
are still present.
They are unavoidable.
SUSANNE CRAIG: Yes.
ROBERT WEISSMAN: And it makes no
difference
if he maintains ownership of the
Trump Organization
businesses and lets his children
run the businesses.
At the same time, those children
are plainly
going to be centrally involved
in administration
and policy-making.
JOHN YANG: Susanne, we talked
about the specific
example of that hotel.
He's a real estate businessman.
He relies on low interest rates
from banks
to prosper.
He says he won't release his tax
returns because
they're being audited.
But talk about the nexus of his
role as president
and those issues as well.
SUSANNE CRAIG: Well, the thing
is, sometimes,
it's -- these conflicts and
potential conflicts
exist, and it's simply that you
don't know
a lot of conversations that are
going on,
which is why there is a call for
him to divest
the assets.
I mean, you can't -- you can't
have your children
run them and then not know what
the assets
are, and especially in the case
of real estate.
These are fixed assets.
He knows the financials of them.
So, unless there's a full
divestiture, there's
just -- there's no way that
these either real
conflicts or potential conflicts
come up.
And the other thing that's of
concern is that
he hasn't released his taxes.
We don't have a full picture of
his financial
situation and foreign holdings.
There's just -- there's so much
going on here,
and it's just -- sometimes,
we're just never
even going to know if stuff
happens because
we don't even know, you know,
that there is
even a conflict.
I did a story earlier this year,
and he had
he had released a number of his
lenders.
And it turns out he'd only
released loans
in which the Trump Organization,
in which
there was 100 percent ownership
of the property
behind it.
We found loans on partnerships
that weren't
disclosed and so on.
It's just -- it was sort of
mind-boggling
when I started to do this, this
summer on
just the potential for what
wasn't there and
what we were finding.
And this is a situation where I
just don't
think we're ever going to be
sure, unless
there is a divestiture, that
there isn't something
going on or there is the
potential for something
to go on.
And it's troubling.
JOHN YANG: Robert, we have a
very brief amount
of time left.
What can be done?
And what do you want to see done
in this case?
ROBERT WEISSMAN: Well, there's
just no way
to square the candidate's
promises to deal
with corruption in Washington,
to end ended
insider dealing and his
maintaining these
business interests.
So he's going to have to sell
them off, unless
he's going to discredit
everything he ran
on.
JOHN YANG: Robert Weissman,
Susanne Craig,
thanks very much for joining us.
SUSANNE CRAIG: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The struggle
over the Dakota
Access oil pipeline intensified
this week,
with protesters in a number of
cities joining
the Native tribes who are
opposed to the project.
Meanwhile, the company building
the pipeline
is pushing back, filing suit in
federal court
yesterday to get its last permit
issued.
William Brangham continues his
reporting on
this legal and environmental
standoff.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: From New York
to Chicago
to Los Angeles, protests against
the Dakota
Access oil pipeline have spread
nationwide
this week.
Opponents say the last remaining
section of
the pipeline would threaten the
drinking water
and cultural lands of the
Standing Rock Sioux
Tribe in North Dakota.
MAN: They're threatening
millions of people
in the entire region and
threaten ultimately
the climate of the entire
planet.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
1,200-mile-long pipeline
would carry 500,000 gallons of
crude oil every
day from North Dakota through
South Dakota
and Iowa to a shipping point in
Illinois.
But, since August, hundreds,
sometimes thousands
of members of various Indian
tribes and nations
have gathered at a camp near
Cannon Ball,
North Dakota, to try to stop
construction.
They're drawing support from
outside figures
as well, including Robert F.
Kennedy Jr.,
who visited yesterday.
ROBERT F. KENNEDY JR.,
President, Waterkeeper
Alliance: I think they have a
lot of courage.
I think they're standing up for
America, that
they're standing up in the face
of a bully.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Elsewhere,
dozens of people
were arrested yesterday near
Mandan, North
Dakota, for blocking railway
tracks near a
pipeline work site.
Meanwhile, a court fight looms.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
granted construction
permits back in July, but, two
months later,
stopped work and called for
further review.
And then, on Monday, the Corps
announced a
further delay.
Now the pipeline builder,
Texas-based Energy
Transfer Partners, is asking a
federal judge
to give the remaining
construction the go-ahead.
In a statement Tuesday, the
company decried
what it called the Obama
administration's
"political interference" and
"its flagrant
disregard for the rule of law."
For more on this ongoing fight,
I'm joined
now by Kelcy Warren.
He's the CEO of Energy Transfer
Partners,
the company that owns and is
building the
Dakota Access pipeline.
Mr. Warren, thank you very much
for being
here.
KELCY WARREN, CEO, Energy
Transfer Partners:
Thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's talk
about the overarching
fight that is going on here.
As you well know, the Standing
Rock Tribe
has two principal arguments.
One, the construction of this
pipeline is
going to damage ancestral sites
of theirs,
and, two, if the pipeline is
built and it
goes under the Missouri River,
that it is
going to, if it were to leak,
potentially
contaminate their drinking
water.
And I wonder what your response
to those concerns
are.
KELCY WARREN: Yes.
Well, first of all, I think this
is well-known
by now.
We're not on any Indian property
at all, no
Native American property.
We're on private lands.
That's number one.
Number two, this pipeline is new
steel pipe.
We're boring underneath Lake
Oahe.
It's going to go 90 feet to 150
feet below
the lake's surface.
It's thick wall pipe, extra
thick, by the
way, more so than just the
normal pipe that
we lay.
Also, on each side of the lake,
there's automated
valves that, if in the very,
very unlikely
situation there were to be a
leak, our control
room shuts down the pipe,
encapsulates that
small section that could be in
peril.
So, that's that's just not going
to happen.
Number one, we're not going to
have a leak.
I can't promise that, of course,
but that
-- no one would get on airplanes
if they thought
they were going to crash.
And, number two, there is no way
there would
be any crude contaminate their
water supply.
They're 70 miles downstream.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the
things that really
seems to irk the people out
there at the Standing
Rock Tribe is that the pipeline
was originally
scheduled and slotted to go
north, just north
of Bismarck.
And after there were concerns
about endangering
the water supply there, the
pipeline was rerouted
south next to the Standing Rock
Tribe.
And their belief is, why were
the concerns
of Bismarck residents given
greater weight
than the concerns that we have?
KELCY WARREN: Well, they
certainly were not
by Energy Transfer Partners.
We're vulnerable to these
routings, too.
The Army Corps of Engineers
weighs in heavily.
They asked for input from all
concerned.
They get that input.
And then they suggest to us what
deviation
in the route should be taken.
Keep in mind, Energy Transfer,
we're laying
a pipeline to have minimal
impact to all people
concerned, and with great input
from our government.
So, this route, it wasn't just
something that
Energy Transfer said, hey, let's
build it
here.
This was after great
consultation with the
Army Corps of Engineers, the
offering up for
consultation with also the
Standing Rock Sioux,
which they didn't choose to do.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You say that
it's very unlikely
or very rare that this pipeline
might rupture,
but some companies' pipelines
seem to spill
more than others.
And your subsidiary Sunoco
Logistics has a
pretty poor track record when it
comes to
leaks.
According to analysis done by
Reuters, Sunoco
Logistics spills more crude than
any of its
competitors, 200 oil leaks in
the last six
years.
Doesn't that safety record
indicate that the
concerns of the Standing Rock
Tribe ought
to be listened to?
KELCY WARREN: I disagree with
that statistic
about Sunoco Logistics.
But everybody should be
concerned about that.
But keep in mind there's a
difference here.
This is a body of water.
This is a pipe that's been
designed specifically
to fit into a bore underneath
the riverbed.
This is very thick wall pipe.
It's brand-new steel.
Any reports they're talking
about with Sunoco,
Sunoco is a 100-plus-year-old
company.
And there's some very, very old
pipe in our...
(CROSSTALK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But we have
seen ruptures
in very recent, newly built
pipes.
Your Permian Express pipeline in
Texas was
a brand-new pipe.
It spilled 8,000 barrels, I
believe.
Keystone One, again, a very new
pipeline,
spilled 14 times in its first
year.
It just seems like the concerns
of the Standing
Rock Tribe are not based on
nothing.
KELCY WARREN: You know, look,
again, like
I said, everybody should be
concerned about
spilling oil on the ground or
gasoline or
any hydrocarbon or any
contaminant, for that
matter.
Energy Transfer is doing the
very best we
can.
We're complying with all the
laws, all the
rules, and we're overdesigning.
This pipeline is being built to
safety standards
that far exceed what the
government requires
us to do.
And I just think the likelihood
of a spill
into Lake Oahe is just extremely
remote.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What about the
other concern
that the tribe brings up, that
the construction
of this pipeline is damaging
sacred sites
of theirs, that your bulldozers
have already
damaged it there?
They also are very upset with
the fact that
your company apparently
discovered historical
artifacts and dragged your feet,
according
to them, in reporting it to
authorities.
KELCY WARREN: Those are just
lies.
They're complete lies.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: No basis in
fact?
KELCY WARREN: No, not at all.
Let's go to the real facts.
The facts are, we worked with
the state of
North Dakota, we worked with the
federal government
to assure us that we were not
disturbing any
historical sites.
We hired archaeologists.
The state of North Dakota
concluded that -- the
Army Corps of Engineers
concluded we have
not damaged any historical
sites.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Last question
for you.
President Trump, president-elect
Trump is
-- I know he holds some stock in
your company,
reportedly, and I know you're a
big supporter
of his.
Do you think, when he becomes
president, that
he will simply authorize the
construction
of this pipeline?
KELCY WARREN: Well, I don't
think -- I don't
think a president actually
authorizes an easement.
I think he allows the rules,
procedures and
laws.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But you think
it will happen
when he takes over?
KELCY WARREN: I do, yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And what
happens to the
protesters at that point?
I mean, the ones that I have
spoken to said
that they are not going anywhere
and that
they're building shelters for
the winter and
they're going to wait this out.
KELCY WARREN: The people of the
state of North
Dakota are generally, generally
wonderful
people, law-abiding, nonviolent
people.
And they're trying to go about
their lives.
This has been such a disruption
to that state.
This is not a peaceful protest.
So, if they want to stick around
and continue
to do what they're doing, great,
but we're
building the pipeline.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Kelcy Warren,
CEO of Energy Transfer Partners,
thanks very
much for talking with us.
KELCY WARREN: Thank you, sir.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
rare look into
an astronaut's adventures in
space; and, in
remembrance of Gwen Ifill, we
explore the
battle against gynecological
cancers.
But first: It's been more than
five weeks
since Iraqi forces, backed by
airstrikes from
the U.S.-led coalition, began
the campaign
to retake Mosul from ISIS.
The city is the largest in
either Iraq or
Syria still held by the
militants, and the
fight to retake it has been
vicious.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson and videographer
Alessandro Pavone have spent the
last several
days with Iraqi special forces
inside the
city, and sent us this report.
JANE FERGUSON: Searching for
enemy movement,
Major Ziad Al-Goberi (ph) leads
his squad
of fighters.
On the radio, reports that
several ISIS gunmen
are rushing this front-line
position.
His men are ready.
They have pushed this far into
Mosul city,
and, from a mosque, Iraq's
special forces
fight off counterattacks.
MAN: You see these guys?
JANE FERGUSON: "A fighter just
blew himself
up just over there," he tells
us.
This tangle of wreckage is all
that separates
his soldiers from the suicide
bombers.
This is as far as the front line
comes here
in Mosul in this neighborhood,
just this pile
of rubble, beyond it, ISIS
fighters.
Taking Mosul from ISIS is the
toughest mission
these men have ever faced.
Brutal street-to-street fighting
pushed the
militants from this area just
days go.
So, this was a
marketplace here in this
neighborhood of Mosul.
The fighters here tell us that
there was a
heavy battle with ISIS fighters
here.
Their bodies are still strewn
around the area.
Iraqi forces are facing an enemy
that embraces
and celebrates death, and in a
nearby house,
we are suddenly told more ISIS
fighters are
approaching.
Major Ziad orders his men onto
the roof, and
the fight begins.
ISIS fighters are just in the
building right
next door to us here.
And the Iraqi special forces are
exchanging
fire with them.
(GUNFIRE)
JANE FERGUSON: This kind of
fighting on the
front line is happening every
day right now
in Mosul now.
What happened?
MAN (through translator): In the
neighborhood
in front of us, there is a group
of ISIS fighters,
plus a car bomb.
They always try to send car
bombs.
JANE FERGUSON: When the fighting
eases, civilians
appear from their houses on the
street outside.
One soldier proudly shows us his
loot he's
poached from ISIS: uniforms and
memorabilia
of the Islamic State.
Further down the street, Major
Ziad sees more
ISIS fighters.
He calls for a mortar strike.
On this tablet, they can
pinpoint targets
in the city.
With so many civilians still in
their homes,
there is no room for error.
They then race to the rooftop to
get a better
view.
The front line snakes through
the streets
around us.
ISIS fighters can come from many
sides.
Two mortars hit buildings
nearby.
Can you tell us, what are the
main dangers
in this battle?
MAN (through translator): The
most dangerous
thing ISIS is using is the car
bomb.
Also they have a new style,
using drone-carried
bombs.
They can control them with the
remote.
They use a small amount of
explosives.
They target our cars and groups
of us.
JANE FERGUSON: ISIS had two
years to plan
its defense, and the group spent
that time
innovating its tactics and
weapons.
Thick armor envelops car bombs.
Bullets cannot penetrate them,
so suicidal
drivers tear towards Iraqi
fighters, seen
here in an ISIS propaganda
video.
In this urban environment, cars
can appear
from around corners just yards
away, so crude
barricades have been erected,
and civilians
banned from driving.
If any car approaches, these
soldiers shoot.
And ISIS is not only deadly
above ground.
An elaborate network of
underground passageways
allow their fighters to creep up
behind advancing
forces and shoot at them.
Hidden below, they can hide from
U.S. coalition
airstrikes.
During the battle, ISIS fighters
wouldn't
just move around through here.
They could also live in these
tunnels.
You can see they have been
sleeping all along
this one.
They even have gas lanterns left
and uniforms
here.
Digging machines, like this one
captured by
Iraqi forces, are what ISIS is
using to make
the tunnels, giving themselves
an advantage
in the urban environment.
Even after their retreat, ISIS
is able to
inflict casualties.
They rig houses with booby-traps
and leave
hidden bombs across this city,
causing devastating
injuries to soldiers and slowing
the army's
advance.
Abdullah Ali's job in the bomb
disposal unit
just cost him his eye.
A hidden bomb exploded on him
last week when
he opened the front door of a
house.
ABDULLAH ALI, Injured in Bomb
Blast (through
translator): ISIS planted it in
the house.
I tried to clear the house, so a
family could
return to it.
And then I got hit.
JANE FERGUSON: Outnumbered and
outgunned,
ISIS' bomb-making tactics are a
way to compensate.
ABDULLAH ALI (through
translator): Of course,
the ISIS' main plan is to use
bombs and car
bombs and IEDs.
They don't have military power,
so they depend
on them.
JANE FERGUSON: The people living
in Mosul
are also used by ISIS as cover,
around a million
are still in the city, on the
front line of
a war that rages around them.
And with so many families still
sheltering
inside their homes, airstrikes
risk killing
the innocent.
While the Iraqi army battled
ISIS fighters
in these streets, the people
here waited and
prayed for days for it to be
over.
This family had been hiding
inside their house.
Like so many families in Mosul,
they have
found themselves on the front
line caught
between ISIS and the Iraqi army.
Food finally arrived with these
government
handouts, and residents poured
into the streets
to get help.
There is a steady stream of
civilians fleeing
the city, with nothing but
homemade white
flags as a flimsy signal that
they mean no
harm.
Some are loaded onto trucks
bound for refugee
camps.
Others simply walk, hoping to
find help.
It's a treacherous journey.
Villages like this outside Mosul
have now
really just become transit
points.
Others fleeing from further
inside the city
move through here to make it to
camps.
There is still fighting ongoing
even out here
on the outskirts of the city.
American involvement in this war
is not so
visible in Mosul City, but it is
hugely significant.
Over 5,000 U.S. troops are
present in Iraq,
training and advising Iraqis.
U.S. airstrikes, artillery,
rockets and special
forces are giving crucial
support to the army's
advance.
In control-and-command centers,
American and
Iraqi military leaders monitor
the battle
together.
U.S. Army Colonel Brett Sylvia
is the commanding
officer at Camp Swift Base
outside Mosul.
COL.
BRETT SYLVIA, U.S. Army: The
progress was
very fast in being able to get
to Mosul, and
predictably, it slows down when
you hit this
dense urban area.
But, still, every single day,
they make forward
progress.
but regardless of how long it
takes, it's
not a question of if Mosul will
be liberated,
but just a question of when.
JANE FERGUSON: The American
military is giving
them as much of a battleground
advantage as
they can, but Iraqi soldiers
will still have
to fight their way through the
city's treacherous
streets.
Men like Major Ziad and his
troops have a
long and dangerous battle ahead.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Mosul, Iraq.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now some
lessons from time
spent in space from a man who
seemed like
a most unlikely candidate to
become an astronaut.
Miles O'Brien has a conversation
about a most
unusual career, part of our
weekly series
on the Leading Edge of science
and technology.
MILES O'BRIEN: Mike Massimino
went to low-Earth
orbit twice aboard the space
shuttle, both
times to repair the Hubble space
telescope.
In his new book, "Spaceman," he
details the
long and difficult journey he
took to become
an astronaut.
So, you're afraid of heights.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO, NASA
Astronaut: Yes, I
still am.
I don't like this right here,
Miles.
I'm a little worried.
MILES O'BRIEN: You don't swim
very well.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: No.
The hardest thing for me as an
astronaut was
to improve my swimming skills.
MILES O'BRIEN: Vision was a
problem, a real
problem.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Imagine being
D.Q.ed because
I couldn't see well enough.
MILES O'BRIEN: And you barely
got through
the program at MIT.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Yes.
Yes.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, really, it's
completely
improbable that you became an
astronaut.
Right?
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Yes, yes,
absolutely.
MILES O'BRIEN: We met beside the
shuttle Enterprise
display at the Intrepid Sea, Air
and Space
Museum in New York City, his
hometown.
It occurs to me, though, that
the lessons
you learned all along the way,
then, dealing
-- coping and dealing with those
setbacks,
those failures, the resilience,
are exactly
what you need to go through to
become an astronaut.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Aha.
Now we're getting at something.
I think you're right, yes.
It's not a question of being the
best at something
or things coming easy to you,
but it's being
a person that can work with
others and not
give up.
And, for me, that was part of it
too.
At every step of the way, when I
had trouble,
there were people that came in,
in my life
that helped me.
It's important to go seek help
when you need
it, and to give help when other
people need
it.
And that is really more
important than coming
in with a gigantic brain into
the astronaut
program.
MILES O'BRIEN: That's an
important lesson
for all of us, I think.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: I think so,
especially
when doing things that are
really hard.
MILES O'BRIEN: It occurs to me
that this book,
to some degree, it's about
space, but space
is almost a backdrop for a
completely separate
story.
Is that the way you view it?
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: I applied to
be an astronaut
four times.
I was rejected three times
before I was accepted.
So, it's about that, not --
following your
dream and not giving up.
MILES O'BRIEN: If you hadn't
persevered and
become an astronaut, what would
you be doing
today?
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Yes, I would
probably be
working on my next astronaut
application.
I think -- that's what I think.
(LAUGHTER)
MILES O'BRIEN: You always made
an effort to
connect with and try to relate
the experience
to others.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Yes.
MILES O'BRIEN: But I don't think
I have ever
heard any astronaut put words to
that experience
that really do it justice.
Is it possible to explain
especially what
it's like when you're on an EVA,
on a space
walk?
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: It's very
emotional.
So, the way I try to describe it
is what I
was feeling.
And viewing our planet was so
compelling.
Words like beautiful and awesome
just don't
do it justice.
I felt that I was looking at a
paradise.
I was looking at heaven.
I can't imagine any place being
more beautiful
than our planet and how lucky we
are to be
able to live here.
And that's what I felt.
That's what I was thinking at
the time, which
I think is a better way for me
to explain
it than trying to think of words
that don't
exist to explain to people just
how beautiful
it is.
MILES O'BRIEN: That's pretty
good.
Not bad.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Well, thanks.
MILES O'BRIEN: There was a
moment on that
flight where you might have
ruined your
stop-and-smell-the-roses
moment, and that was when you
almost broke
the Hubble.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Yes.
We were trying to do a repair of
the space
telescope imaging spectrograph,
but, before
we could do that, we had a very
easy task,
which was to remove a handrail
with big bolts
on it.
But I went and stripped one of
those bolts.
So, the solution that came up to
take the
handrail off was to see if I
could just tear
it of the telescope.
I don't know if that ever would
have crossed
my mind.
That is so counter to the way we
do things.
But, luckily, we had smart
engineers that
thought of it on the ground.
I'm inside the Hubble space
telescope doing
this million-dollar repair on
this billion-dollar
telescope.
Houston, you ready for this?
MAN: Yes, we're ready.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: I grabbed
that handrail
and gave it a couple of tugs,
and, wang, it
came right off.
It's off.
MILES O'BRIEN: Final thought.
Think about how fortunate we
were to be alive
on that day in 1969...
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Yes.
Yes.
MILES O'BRIEN: ... they walked
to the moon.
We were kind of sprinkled with
moon dust,
our generation.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Yes, we were
very lucky.
MILES O'BRIEN: And it inspired a
whole generation
of astronauts of your
generation.
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Yes.
Right.
MILES O'BRIEN: Do you worry that
young people
today don't have a similar
inspiration?
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: I talk to a
lot of high
schools students around the
country.
They still have that same
interest, but it's
just different.
It's not like we had.
It's a way -- what was given to
us, it's different.
Now we can engage with the
astronauts that
are in space.
I was the first person to tweet
from space,
but now every astronaut tweets
from space
and does Instagram and Snapchat
and Face -- they
have Facebook going.
So, I think it's more of a
personal relationship
they have with space now.
They see it as more obtainable
than me watching
my superhero Neil Armstrong and
Buzz Aldrin
walking on the moon.
It's like, there's no way I can
do that.
I think it's more engageable,
and it's just
different than what we had.
But they still think it's very,
very cool.
And I don't see that interest
waning.
I see it -- I see it as growing.
MILES O'BRIEN: All right, Mike
Massimino,
thank you very much.
(LAUGHTER)
MICHAEL MASSIMINO: Thanks,
Miles.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's a pleasure.
Enjoyed it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Online, find a
review of
"Mars," a new six-part
miniseries that premiered
Monday on the National
Geographic Channel.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Next: the battle against cancer,
specifically,
gynecological cancers.
Gwen died on Monday at the age
of 61, after
her fight with endometrial
cancer, also referred
to as uterine cancer.
It is one of several
gynecological cancers
women face that sometimes get
less attention.
More than 50,000 women in the
U.S. are diagnosed
with uterine cancer each year,
and more than
9,300 die from it.
Ovarian cancer is better known.
About 20,000 women are diagnosed
each year,
and more than 14,000 die from it
annually.
Cervical cancer's death rate has
dropped dramatically.
Roughly 12,000 are diagnosed
with it annually.
More than 4,000 die from it.
We're not focused on Gwen's
particular case
tonight, but we wanted to take
this moment
to look at the latest efforts to
diagnose
and treat these cancers.
Dr. Karen Lu is chair of
gynecologic oncology
at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
in Houston.
And Dr. Angela Marshall is an
adviser to the
Black Women's Health Imperative.
She is a women's health
specialist in Maryland.
Dr. Lu, now that we have set the
table a little
bit, let's add a little context
to this.
In relation to other cancers,
how prevalent
are these?
DR.
KAREN LU, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center: So,
all together, as you said,
almost 100,000
women this year will be
diagnosed with a gynecologic
cancer.
And, importantly, with uterine
cancer, it's
on the rise.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And put that
in perspective.
Compared to -- you know, there's
a horrible
reality in the cancer
marketplace that some
cancers get more attention than
others, and
then the more attention they
get, the more
research funding they get as
well.
So, how do these cancers compete
and fare
when we think about all the
other cancers
that are out there?
DR.
KAREN LU: There definitely is
less attention,
even though there's such a high
number of
women with these cancers.
And I think the breast cancer
community has
done a fantastic job about
demystifying and
being open about talking about
breast cancer,
about risk factors, about what
early signs
are.
And I think, when we're talking
about gynecologic
cancers -- so that's cancer of
the uterus,
the cervix, and the ovaries --
we're a little
bit more maybe perhaps
embarrassed to talk
about it.
And that -- that goes towards
individual women
and the impact that that may
have in terms
of them thinking about symptoms
that they
may have, and also kind of on a
broader scale
in terms of really garnering
interest and
increasing research funding for
the diseases.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr. Marshall,
I have heard
them described as below-the-belt
cancers.
Is there a stigma attached with
discussing
this openly, compared to, say,
breast cancer
which, societally, we seem to
have no problem
talking about?
DR.
ANGELA MARSHALL, Black Women's
Health Imperative:
I think there is.
But I think, more importantly, I
think this
is a good time to talk about the
importance
of women and self-care.
And by self-care, I mean the
importance of
getting screening tests.
And screening tests are tests
that we do when
people are having no symptoms.
So, when we do mammograms, we're
screening
for breast cancer in women who
have not symptoms.
However, for uterine and for
ovarian cancer,
we don't have adequate screening
tests for
those.
So those are tests that rely on
women reporting
symptoms before we do any kind
of workup.
And so I think it's important to
get the word
out.
I think education is extremely
important.
People need to know what the
symptoms are,
and they need to know what tests
to be requesting
from their health care
providers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr. Lu, is
there a gap in
women seeing symptoms, but not
necessarily
reporting them, or not even
knowing that they
are symptoms?
DR.
KAREN LU: I think there's two
gaps.
I think there's a gap where
women don't know
that there are early symptoms of
these cancers,
and so don't recognize them.
And then there's also a gap when
they report
these symptoms.
Sometimes, they can be
nonspecific.
And certainly, with ovarian
cancer, women
will present with bloating or
their bellies
will be bigger, very nonspecific
pain.
And, sometimes, physicians will
dismiss these
symptoms and not fully work up
and think about
ovarian cancer or other
gynecologic cancers
as a cause.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr. Marshall,
I see you
nodding your head in agreement
here.
Is this also the case?
And does it disproportionately
affect women
of color or in the
African-American community?
DR.
ANGELA MARSHALL: It does.
And I think, specifically for
African-American
women, it's important to have
health care
providers that we trust, because
there's historically
been some mistrust in the
African-American
community.
It's also important to have good
access to
health care.
And it's important for to us
have access to
health insurance plans that
aren't high deductibles.
You know, some women are forced
with making
a decision to put food on the
table vs. paying
for expensive diagnostic
testing.
And so, sometimes, it boils down
to an economic
issue.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, sometimes,
it's the
infrastructure that's
influencing whether
or not they get the care.
DR.
ANGELA MARSHALL: Exactly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr. Lu, if a
patient gets
one of these diagnoses, what
should they start
thinking about, and how should
they look at
this?
DR.
KAREN LU: That's a great
question.
You know, there's so much
information available
on the Internet, and we say
that's good and
bad.
But I do, overall, think it's
important for
women to arm themselves with
information when
they go seek health care.
I think the second thing is to
really seek
a specialist.
There are -- we are specialists,
gynecologic
oncologists, who focus on
treating these cancers.
And it's really important that
women who are
diagnosed with uterine cancer,
ovarian cancer,
cervix cancer have a specialist
who can take
care of them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr. Marshall,
what about
those cases where, if you don't
have the expertise
of a Dr. Lu, you don't live in
Houston, you
don't live near a major cancer
center or medical
center, how hard is it for
someone to lobby,
basically, for themselves, or
advocate to
try to get that extra level of
care and expertise?
DR.
ANGELA MARSHALL: I think it
starts with having
a health care provider that you
trust.
And, so often, we don't,
especially among
African-Americans.
And so I think your primary care
doctor is
a great resource, and I think
you should be
an advocate for yourself, and
help -- have
them help you with the referrals
to the specialists.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr. Lu, where
does the research
stand in all this, considering
-- especially
even including pharmaceutical
companies, because
they're crucial in the treatment
part?
DR.
KAREN LU: Absolutely.
Research is really important.
And it's a great time now.
There's a lot of exciting
research going on.
So, I like to think about it,
for early-stage
cancers, we're really focusing
on minimizing
treatment in some ways.
So, we're seeing younger women
who are diagnosed
with uterine cancer.
Uterine cancer is very tightly
linked to obesity.
So, as we see an obesity
epidemic, we're seeing
more and more younger women,
women in their
40s, sometimes even in their
30s, with uterine
cancer.
So, we're thinking about, can we
think about
treatment where's we can
preserve the uterus?
Even with cervix cancer, we're
thinking about,
are there options for women to
be able to
have the option of childbearing?
So, that's for early-stage.
For later-stage cancers, there's
a lot of
emphasis on understanding the
very basic molecular
kind of DNA genes that
contribute to the cancer
cells.
Once we understand that, we're
able to bring
in some of these new targeted
therapies, immunotherapy.
So, it's an exciting time, but
it requires
-- it requires resources.
It requires women to be open to
clinical trials.
And I really want to stress
that, because
I think that, if we're going to
make advances
-- and we need to, especially
for women who
have advanced-stage disease --
we're going
to really need to encourage
women to participate
in clinical trials.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr Karen Lu,
Dr. Angela
Marshall, thank you for what
might be the
first of many conversations on
this topic.
Thank you very much.
DR.
ANGELA MARSHALL: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you, too.
In 2013, major repairs began on
the dome atop
the U.S. Capitol.
Yesterday, those much-needed
renovations officially
wrapped up.
The "NewsHour"'s Julia Griffin
filed this
report from Capitol Hill.
STEPHEN AYERS, Architect of the
Capitol: Good
morning, everyone.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Architect of the
Capitol, Stephen
Ayers, stood before Washington's
iconic landmark
to declare its latest renovation
complete.
STEPHEN AYERS: The AOC's motto
is to serve,
preserve and inspire, and we do
so every day
across this Capitol campus.
But this one project was the
most visible
of all, the symbol of America's
democracy
and the beacon of hope for
millions around
the world.
And we delivered.
JULIA GRIFFIN: The current dome
was added
to the U.S. Capitol in the
1860s, even as
the Civil War raged.
Ever since, its nearly nine
million pounds
of cast-iron have stood tall
amid political
storms and literal ones.
The dome last saw major repairs
in 1960, when
rust-prohibiting paint turned it
temporarily
red.
But, 50 years on, the Capitol's
main attraction
had deteriorated once more.
Surveyors found cracks and
peeling paint were
allowing moisture to seep in,
threatening
infrastructure, art work and
people inside.
STEPHEN AYERS: We determined
that it was time
to intervene.
We were losing too much historic
and original
material of the dome.
JULIA GRIFFIN: So, the latest
nearly $60 million
face-lift got under way.
For nearly three years, workers
stood on 1.1
million pounds of scaffolding to
repair the
more than 12,000 inches of
cast-iron cracks.
The team restored the dome's
decorative ornaments
and cupola windows, and placed
white draping
inside to protect the Rotunda
below.
That dome donut, as it was
affectionately
called, allowed interior repairs
to go forward,
while still giving the one
million visitors
a year a glimpse of the
historical fresco
above.
But this summer, as temperatures
went up,
the scaffolding started to come
down, and
workers applied more than 1,200
gallons of
paint, appropriately named dome
white, as
a finishing touch along the way.
STEPHEN AYERS: It's so important
for us to
have this grand Capitol Building
to look magnificent
and to truly be our nation's
stage.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Ayers now turns
his attention
to the next big event on Capitol
Hill, the
inauguration of president-elect
Donald Trump.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Julia Griffin
in Washington, D.C.,
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online
right now: Our video on the
physics of how
smells move in our environment
just won the
2016 Science Journalism Digital
Short Award.
You can watch that video on our
Web site.
All that and more is online at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tonight on "Charlie Rose,"
journalist James
Fallows looks at the challenges
China is facing.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.